“Sometimes I wonder if I had one person in this world, I would always be talking to him/her. Every thought, action, argument, sentences, words, feelings, sounds, views, songs, people, their mannerisms, my mundane observations, judgements, everything would be waiting in line to be out there.”
“Don't you have one?”
“Nope. I tell different stories to different people. And sometimes when it's too funny or nice or judgmental or appreciative even I tell the same story to different people in the same way until I get bored of it. And sometimes I just forget them. I forget what I wanted to so eagerly tell people. It gets lost in the present day train of thoughts. And sometimes I don't find people to tell some of my stories. Because they are too busy telling theirs. Or they are engrossed in someone else's. Someone closer. Or they are just busy. And these unheard stories they get buried. Sometimes in my poetry, or in my short stories, or in my Google docs, or in the doodling in my notebooks or at last I spit them out in a conversation with someone, in my imagination.” 
“So now you talk to everybody?”
“Yes, almost. Because there is no one person. You know I feel like I need everybody. And in that process, I'm losing my one person. I'm missing out on all those people who could be a little closer than an arms distance to me. I have everybody. Everybody at an arm's distance. Henceforth I'm always alone and together too. I know most of the things about most of the people that most people don't know. I guess I just lend them an ear. And then they go all about their day and thoughts and plans. And I just sit there taking it all in and then concluding and putting everything about them in a box and giving it a room in my memory. And hence I have multiple small boxes with different names and faces on them. But also I have one very very big box that I'm yet to give somebody.” 
“You can give it to me.”
“Haha. funny. I can’t.”
“Why not?”
“Because you don't have upper arms I can swoon over.”
“What? Upper arms?”