JournalofArtificialIntelligenceResearch71(2021)175-189Submitted12/2020;published06/2021
Viewpoint:
AI as Author – Bridging the Gap

Studies in computational creativity concentrate on identifying the core elements of cre
ative forms (such as literature, visual art and music) from an algorithmic perspective, with
the aim of replicating or stimulating human creativity (Turner, 2014; Besold et al., 2015;
Veale et al., 2019). Similarly, natural language generation is interested in the production
of realistic text (Reiter & Dale, 1997)                              Within this field,
the generation of writing that might be considered literary (such as poetry, prose and
drama) is an active research do main, ranging from human-in-the-loop (K¨obis & Mossink,
2021) and machine-in-the-loop approaches (Clark et al., 2018) to fully automated
systems. The aim is to generate creative texts that are indistinguishable from those
written by humans (Singh et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2018; Chandu et al., 2019; Gero &
Chilton, 2019; He et al., 2019; Chakrabarty et al., 2020; Moreno-Jim´enez et al., 2020;
Zhai et al., 2020).
©2021AIAccessFoundation.Allrightsreserved.
VanHeerden&Bas
In this article, we argue for the inclusion of literary scholars in the development of
machine learning models to improve the quality of generated text. To be clear, we are
specifically interested in recent deep learning approaches that do not draw on literary ex
pertise, including those of Jain et al. (2017), Li et al. (2018), Loller-Andersen and
Gamb¨ack (2018), Wei et al. (2018), Xu et al. (2018), Yang et al. (2018), Yi et al. (2018),
Chen et al. (2019), Jhamtani et al. (2019), Liu et al. (2019), Yeh et al. (2019), Zugarini et
al. (2019), Agarwal and Kann (2020). Although some studies ask human judges (with
varying back grounds in literature) to evaluate their output, these evaluators are not
involved in the development of evaluation criteria nor the models in general.
This paper’s concern with evaluation is an illustration of possible insights that may
arise through such interdisciplinary collaboration. Specifically, we rethink the
conceptualisation of weakness in creative language models, which is addressed by way
of an example of the state-of-the-art language model GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019a).
Furthermore, we examine the role of fluency, coherence and readability in the evaluation
of generated poetry, touching on                                   features such
as ambiguity, figurative language and originality as well. This article suggests that a
network of researchers from literary studies and machine learning could work together to
create a shared language between disciplines with vastly different methodologies.
According to Beatie (1979), “[o]nly when computer people learn, for example, to write
readable prose and literary critics learn to understand the language of measurement can
the ‘computer revolution’ in literary studies really begin”.
2. Literary Theory
For this work, we define literature simply and traditionally as imaginative or invented
writing, like fiction (Eagleton, 2011). Literature is a broad term that involves many different
genres (or categories) of texts: poems, short stories, novels, dramatic works, letters,
essays, film scripts and speeches (Todorov & Lyons, 2007). 
             A common misconception is
that literary interpretation is purely subjective or merely based on a person’s intuition
(Hirsch, 1967; Wolfgang, 1978; Richards, 2017). Every good work of literature follows a
certain logic and uses specific techniques to communicate meaning to readers. As an
example, Shakespearean texts are so complex that the bard’s use of literary devices (or
tools of writing) are examined and debated to this day (Powell, 1980; Vickers, 1995;
Purcell, 2010). Although every reader will interpret a story in a slightly different way
because of their unique background, certain elements in the text point in the same
direction.
Not to be dismissed as personal and unscientific – though this is a topic of much dis
cussion (Beatie, 1979) – scholarly deliberations on the substance of literature have a long
standing history. Literary theory1is a well-established field that includes various
competing scholarly approaches, each with its theoretical positions and commitments
(Culler, 1997). It involves the systematic examination of literary texts to understand how
they work (i.e. con vey meaning and give rise to particular interpretations) and why they
are deemed literary, valuable or ‘good’.
1. Note that this article concentrates on literary theory. The nature of the relationship between linguistics
and poetics is subject to scholarly debate (Jakobson, 1960). Although literature may be studied lin
guistically (Fabb, 1997), literary studies and linguistics should not be conflated (Cameron, 2011). For
example, to understand “the work of literature” (Attridge, 2015) one must consider artistic merit, which
requiresmorethanalinguisticapproachtoliterature.
176
AIasAuthor
As there are various types of methods to train machine learning models, there are
various types, or schools, of literature and literary theory. Each theory is an arrangement
of principles or a collection of ideas that helps define and explain particular categories of
writing. Within the field of literary studies one might, for example, examine genre
conventions or the ‘rules’ of these categories, asking which features define a book as
narrative nonfiction, or how does one structure a detective novel, or what makes a
Shakespearean sonnet successful.

Lau et al. (2018) show the importance of expert evaluation for poetry generation, and
argue that future work should focus on moving beyond form. Instead, it could attend to
the complex interconnection of form and feeling (Freeman, 2009). According to Brooks
and Warren (1976), a poem is not an assembly of mechanically combined elements (e.g.
rhyme and meter) like a wall composed of bricks. Rather than concentrating on an
element in isolation, we should concentrate on the relation between elements, on how
they work
177
VanHeerden&Bas
together to communicate meaning and emotion to the reader, i.e. create a poetic effect
(Brooks & Warren, 1976). In other words, we should move beyond generating texts that
‘look’ literary (by mimicking formal properties) to texts that are literary (Veale, 2013).
In the next two sections, we extend this idea through a problematisation of priorities in
text generation. First, centring on evaluation as an example of an important stage in the
creative text generation process and, then, exploring possible avenues of collaboration,
we seek to demonstrate that benefit could be derived from literary theoretical
perspectives.






4. Example Gap: Evaluation
To improve the quality of computer-generated literature, we suggest combining tools and
insights from various text-centred (rather than biographical, cultural or socio-historical) ap
proaches in literary theory. Involving true expertise on what literature is and how it works
would strengthen current research on learning-based text generation systems. The
issues currently faced in machine-generated writing could be addressed more effectively
by ap plying literary theoretical understandings of creativity, originality, ambiguity and
emotion, among others.
However, efforts at collaboration between the “two cultures” face serious obstacles

(H¨am¨al¨ainen & Alnajjar, 2019).
Qualitative evaluation, in comparison to quantitative methods, has been viewed as in
consistent, unsystematic and therefore less effective (Lawrence, 1993). However, the
differ ence between the two methods lies in that “the logic of qualitative evaluation is
grounded in a willingness to accept ambiguity, rather than being wedded to a ‘horse race’
mentality in which the [approach] with the highest gain score is the winner” (McLeod,
2011). This makes it the ideal approach to literature, given its propensity for resisting
straightforward

Jakobson (1923) fa mously described literary language as “organised violence committed
on ordinary speech”. In the modernist sense, poetry may be thought of as a language
laboratory, a space of experimentation with language itself (Korg, 1979).
Gruber (1988) views originality as a constituent of creativity, which he associates with
a deliberate departure from norms. Literary techniques include asyntactic structure
(showing no syntactical rules or regularity), 

anastrophe (deliberate change of word order),
anadiplosis (repetition for special effect) and ambiguity (discussed in 4.2.3). Considering,
for instance, stream of consciousness and surrealist techniques, further examples are the
absence of formal features (such as rhyme, meter and punctuation) and typographic
experiments – see “l(a” (Cummings, 1991) and “In a Station of the Metro” (Pound, 1913).
The argument that creative endeavours “must deal not with the predictable and
repeatable – the stuff of normal science – but with the unique and unrepeatable” (Gruber,
1988) presents an occasion to rethink conceptualisations of weakness in language
models, returning us to the vital question of evaluation.


6. Conclusion
Ng (2017) states that AI is the new electricity. Collaboration between areas of knowledge
on this subject is inevitable. According to Potter (1991),
we [computerscholars]mustconnectourselves–throughtheory–tothelargerworld
of thought that we live in. As a developing discipline, we have for too long lived ina
tinkering “let’s-try-this-and-see-what-happens” mode. [...].Bruteanalysiswithoutan
elegantly and elaborately structured sense of why we are doing what we are doing
leadstoassertionsthatdonotmatter.
182
AIasAuthor
This study recommends drawing on expertise in the humanities, primarily literary the
ory, to contribute to the development of computer science, specifically AI writing. To
achieve human-level creativity, machine-generated literature has to overcome various
obsta cles, such as ambiguity, emotional impact, poetic effect and storytelling. Engaging
with the scholars that specialise in the building blocks of imaginative writing – literature’s
codes, if you will –                            would allow AI researchers to better determine the present
shortcomings of machine-generated literature and explore how structural elements jointly
convey meaning and emotion. Bridging the gap between machine learning techniques
and literary theory could guide future analyses toward developments that matter.
